Feat: Datadog integration (#60)
MaterializeInc/demos: integrations/datadog/README.md

# Materialize + Datadog

<img width="1728" alt="Screenshot 2023-02-01 at 12 53 41" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/11491779/216036715-9a4b4db7-8f93-4b6a-ac21-f7eb5a01d151.png">

## Overview

This is a demo of how to use Datadog to monitor Materialize using the OpenMetrics standard.

Materialize collects information about its internal components in a [public catalog](https://materialize.com/docs/sql/system-catalog/mz_internal/), consumable by tools like [Prometheus SQL Exporter](https://github.com/justwatchcom/sql_exporter/), _"a service that runs user-defined SQL queries at flexible intervals and exports the resulting metrics via HTTP for Prometheus consumption"_.

Datadog's OpenMetrics integration can consume from the Prometheus SQL Exporter endpoint and allows a way to monitor Materialize.

> <img width="1499" alt="Datadog" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/11491779/216926716-cc0cdd46-7ea7-496f-8fa3-a4863fc1ce00.png">

Author: Negative. Only if the background is white.

## Prerequisites

- [Docker Compose](https://docs.docker.com/compose/install/)
- [Materialize instance](https://materialize.com/cloud/)
- [Datadog API Key](https://docs.datadoghq.com/account_management/api-app-keys/)

## Running the demo

1. Start by cloning the repository:

    ```bash
    git clone https://github.com/joacoc/DatadogOpenMetricsMaterialize.git
    cd DatadogOpenMetricsMaterialize
    ```

2. Edit the `config.yaml` file and set your Materialize details under the connections:

    ```yaml
    connections:
    - "postgres://<USER>:<PASSWORD>@<HOST>:<PORT>/materialize"
    ```

3. Edit the `docker-compose.yaml` file and set your Datadog API key:

    ```yaml
    environment:
    - DD_API_KEY=${DD_API_KEY}
    ```

4. Start the demo:

    ```bash
    docker-compose up -d
    ```

5. Open your Datadog account and explore the `materialize.*` metrics.

## Configuration overview

The `config.yaml` file contains the configuration for the Prometheus SQL exporter. The `jobs` section divides into two:

1. The `connections` section where you can configure the Prometheus SQL exporter to connect to multiple Materialize instances:

```yaml

> connections:
> - "postgres://<USER>:<PASSWORD>@<HOST>:<PORT>/materialize"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
jobs:
- name: "global"
  interval: '1m'
  connections:
  - "postgres://MZ_USER:MZ_PASSWORD@MZ_HOST:6875/materialize"
```

Reviewer: The way these configuration options is laid out can be improved in both demos. `connections` is a configuration option, just as `interval` and `name` are. Using "section" isn't that accurate. I can propose something after this is merged and we give it another pass to make the READMEs more consistent.

2. The `queries` section where you can configure the Prometheus SQL exporter to export metrics from Materialize:

```yaml
queries:
- name: "replica_memory_usage"
    help: "Replica memory usage"
    labels:
    - "replica_name"
    - "cluster_id"
    values:
    - "memory_percent"
    query:  |
            SELECT
            name::text as replica_name,
            cluster_id::text as cluster_id,
            memory_percent::float as memory_percent
            FROM mz_cluster_replicas r join mz_internal.mz_cluster_replica_utilization u on r.id=u.replica_id;
```

The `queries` section contains all the queries that the Prometheus SQL exporter will run to export metrics from Materialize. Each query has the following fields:
- **Name**: This is the name of the metric that will be exported to Prometheus
- **Labels**: These are the columns that will be used as labels in the exported metric
- **Values**: These are the columns that will be used as values in the exported metric
- **Query**: This is the SQL query that will be run to get the data for the metric

> ## Adding extra Prometheus SQL exporter checks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Adding extra Prometheus SQL exporter checks
```

> To configure the Prometheus SQL exporter to export additional metrics, add a new entry to the `sql_exporter` section of the `config.yaml` file. For example, to export the number of rows in the `orders` table, add the following:

Reviewer: Should this be `queries`, instead of `sql_exporter`? 🤔

Author: Vote `sql_exporter` - Keeps the standard reference name in the Prometheus and monitoring context.

```yaml
sql_exporter:
- name: "total_orders"
    help: "Total Orders"
    values:
    - "count"
    query:  |
            select count(*) from orders
```

## Datadog's OpenMetrics integration

> Datadog's agent will run and use the configuration file available in `datadog/conf.d/openmetrics.yaml`. The available configuration file describes consuming and sending all the metrics available from the Prometheus SQL Exporter endpoint.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Datadog's agent will pick up the `/conf.d/openmetrics.yaml` configuration file to consume the metrics available in the Prometheus SQL Exporter endpoint.
```
